'\" vim:set syntax=nroff:
'\" <<ital-is-var>>
.TH GMA-STYLE.CONF 5 "GMA-Mapper 4.27" 30-Nov-2024 "File Formats" \" @@mp@@
.SH NAME
style.conf \- GMA GUI Style Configuration File
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
'\" <<Warning>>
.B "This file is now deprecated."
Its function is now superseded by the in-app preference editor.
'\" <</Warning>>
'\" <<bold-is-fixed>>
.LP
The
.BR gma-mapper (6)
battle grid program, along with other GUI tools such as
.BR gma-initiative-clock (6),
use colors and fonts to indicate a number of things on their displays.
The
.B style.conf
file described here allows the user to customize any or all of these
settings. This file may be specified to the application using command-line
options. Otherwise, if the file
.B ~/.gma/mapper/style.conf
exists, it will be read by default. See the manpage entries for the
individual programs for details.
.LP
The overall format of this file is that of a classic Windows INI file;
that is, the file is divided into named stanzas. Within each stanza is
a set of named values, one per line.
.LP
Each stanza begins with a line containing only the stanza name in square
brackets.
Each value is defined by a line that begins with the value name, followed
by an equals sign, followed by the value itself.
.SS "Tool Stanzas"
.LP
A stanza with the name of a GMA tool defines the style settings for that
tool. Currently-supported tool names (i.e., the names of these stanzas)
include just
.RB \*(lq mapper \*(rq.
The tool-name stanza may include the following definitions:
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 16
.BI fonts= stanza
Specifies the stanza which defines the custom fonts to be used by this program.
.TP
.BI dierolls= stanza
Specifies the stanza which defines the custom styling to be used for die roll displays.
'\" <</>>
.SS "Font Definitions"
.LP
A font definition stanza defines named fonts with lines of the form
.RS
.IB fontname = definition
.RE
.LP
The definition of the font is provided by giving option-value pairs. You need only
provide the options which differ from the default for a given font for your system.
If the value in any of these pairs contains spaces, it must be enclosed in curly
braces. Options and values are separated from each other with whitespace.
.LP
The available options are:
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 12
.B \-family
The name of the font. The underlying Tk system provides the family names
.BR Courier ,
.BR Helvetica ,
and
.BR Times ,
which are representative names for a fixed-width, sans serif, and serifed font, respectively;
these may not necessarily be fonts with those exact names. You may also use the name of any
font known on your system. This name is case-insensitive.
.TP 
.B \-size
The size in points of the font, if a positive value. If negative, its absolute value
specifies the font size in pixels.
.TP
.B \-weight
One of
.B normal 
or
.BR bold .
.TP
.B \-slant
One of
.B roman
or 
.BR italic .
.TP
.B \-underline
A boolean value; if true, characters drawn in this font will be underlined.
.TP
.B \-overstrike
A boolean value; if true, characters drawn in this font will have a line struck through
their centers. Note that there is a style setting (q.v.) which will specify overstriking
for a specific display type. This is generally preferred to setting it font-wide so the same
font may be used for values which are overstruck and for others which are not.
'\" <</>>
.LP
Example:
'\" <<TeX>>
'\" \begin{SourceCode}
'\" [mapper]
'\" fonts=myfonts
'\" [myfonts]
'\" hack=-family Hack -size 12
'\" fancy=-family {Fancy Script Regular} -size 24 -slant italic
'\" \end{SourceCode}
.RS
.na
.nf
.B [mapper]
.B fonts=myfonts
.B [myfonts]
.B "hack=\-family Hack \-size 12"
.B "fancy=\-family {Fancy Script Regular} \-size 24 \-slant italic"
.fi
.ad
.RE
'\" <</TeX>>
.SS "Die Roll Style Stanzas"
.LP
There are a number of die roll reporting styles in effect to display the various
elements that make up a report of a die roll result. The color and font of each
may be controlled by entries in this stanza. Any not provided in this stanza will assume
their built-in default values.
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 24
.BI bg_ element = color
Sets the color drawn behind text for the die-roll element named.
.TP
.BI bg_list_even= color
Sets the background color for even-numbered entries in the recent and preset die roll lists.
.TP
.BI bg_list_odd= color
Sets the background color for odd-numbered entries in the recent and preset die roll lists.
.TP
.BI default_font= name
Use the user-defined font
.I name
for all element fonts where no explicit
.BI font_ element
assignment exists in this file.
.TP
.BI fg_ element = color
Sets the color of the text for the die-roll element named.
.TP
.BI fmt_ element = string
Specifies the formatting to be used for the reported
.IR element .
By default, some descriptive punctuation, spacing, and text are presented
around the variable values being reported. If these are not how you would
like those elements to be shown, specify your own string in this configuration
value. The
.I string
is a 
.BR printf (3)-style
format string, with a 
.RB \*(lq %s \*(rq
at the location you would like the data item(s) to appear.
.RS
'\" <</>>
.LP
Since whitespace is allowed around the keys and values in an INI file, which is
automatically ignored, a mechanism is provided to allow your format string to explicitly
contain leading and/or trailing spaces. If your format string (excluding any leading or trailing
spaces) begins or ends with a vertical bar (\*(lq|\*(rq), the bar(s) mark the explicit end(s)
of the string value. Thus, given the configuration file lines:
'\" <<TeX>>
'\" \begin{SourceCode}
'\" fmt_a=  (%s)
'\" fmt_b=| (%s) |
'\" fmt_c=| (%s)
'\" fmt_d=  (%s) |
'\" \end{SourceCode}
.RS
.nf
.na
.B "fmt_a=  (%s)  "
.B "fmt_b=| (%s) |"
.B "fmt_c=| %s"
.B "fmt_d= %s |"
.ad
.fi
.RE
'\" <</TeX>>
the resulting format string for element
.B a
will be 
.RB \*(lq (%s) \*(rq 
(with all spaces stripped); the format for
.B b
will have a space before and after the 
.B (%s) 
part;
.B c
will have a space before its content; and
.B d
will have a space after its content.
.RE
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 26
.BI font_ element = name
Sets the font used for the die-roll element named. This font name must be defined in
the selected font definition stanza in this file.
.TP
.BI offset_ element = delta
Display the text of this element
.I delta
pixels higher than the baseline of the surrounding text. The
.I delta
value may be negative to lower the text.
.TP
.BI overstrike_ element = bool
A boolean value; if true, text for this element will have a line struck through it.
.TP
.BI underline_ element = bool
A boolean value; if true, text for this element will be underlined.
'\" <</>>
.LP
The
.I element
names may be
.BR best ,
.BR bonus ,
.BR constant ,
.BR critlabel ,
.BR critspec ,
.BR dc ,
.BR diebonus ,
.BR diespec ,
.BR discarded ,
.BR exceeded ,
.BR fail ,
.BR fullmax ,
.BR iteration ,
.BR label ,
'\" .BR limit ,
.BR max ,
.BR maximized ,
.BR maxroll ,
.BR met ,
.BR min ,
.BR moddelim ,
.BR operator ,
.BR repeat ,
.BR result ,
.BR roll ,
.BR separator ,
.BR short ,
.BR subtitle ,
.BR success ,
.BR until ,
or
.BR worst ,
the meanings of which are described in
.BR gma-dice (3).
In addition, the elements
.B fullresult 
and
.B title 
control the display of the overall total and user-assigned title for the die roll,
.B comment
describes comments about the die roll from the server,
.B system
is for system-generated messages,
and the elements
.BR from ,
.BR normal ,
and
.B to 
control the appearance of chat messages generally.
.LP
A
.I color
value may be the name of a color as known to the system (e.g., listed in
the X11 
.I rgb.txt
file), such as
.RB \*(lq "alice blue" \*(rq 
or
.RB \*(lq PaleGreen4 \*(rq,
or a hexadecimal color value in the format
.BI # rgb \fR,\fP
.BI # rrggbb \fR,\fP
.BI # rrrgggbbb \fR,\fP
or
.BI # rrrrggggbbbb \fR.\fP
System-defined names such as
.RB \*(lq systemActiveAreaFill \*(rq 
(macOS) and
.RB \*(lq system3dLight \*(rq 
(Windows) are also recognized where available. The X11 names are typically
implemented by the underlying frameworks even on non-Unix-like systems so they
are generally usable everywhere.
.LP
Example:
'\" <<TeX>>
'\"\begin{SourceCode}
'\"; This is an example style.conf file which
'\"; shows how to customize the mapper tool.
'\"[mapper]
'\"dierolls=mydice
'\"fonts=myfonts
'\"
'\"[mydice]
'\"fg_fullresult=red
'\"font_fullresult=hack
'\"fmt_roll=(rolled {%s})
'\"
'\"[myfonts]
'\"hack=\-family Hack -size 12 -weight bold
'\"\end{SourceCode}
.RS
.nf
.na
.B "; This is an example style.conf file which"
.B "; shows how to customize the mapper tool."
.B [mapper]
.B dierolls=mydice
.B fonts=myfonts
.B ""
.B [mydice]
.B fg_fullresult=red
.B font_fullresult=hack
.B "fmt_roll=(rolled {%s})"
.B ""
.B [myfonts]
.B "hack=\-family Hack \-size 12 \-weight bold"
.ad
.fi
.RE
'\" <</TeX>>
.SH HISTORY
.LP
This feature appeared in version 3.33 of the mapper tool.
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Steve Willoughby / steve@madscience.zone.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
.BR gma-dice (3).
.SH BUGS
.LP
The Tcl library support for reading INI files isn't as enhanced as the one in the Python
library, so since the mapper uses this configuration file it needs to conform to the simpler
rules supported by the Tcl library: no multi-line values, keys and values separated only
by an equals sign, and only supports 
.RB \*(lq ; \*(rq 
as the comment character.
.LP
Since this is (eventually) intended to apply to more tools than the mapper,
this really should have been located in
.B ~/.gma
instead of
.BR ~/.gma/mapper .
A future version will either move the default location or search both directories.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Part of the GMA software suite, copyright \(co 1992\-2024 by Steven L. Willoughby, Aloha, Oregon, USA. All Rights Reserved. Distributed under BSD-3-Clause License. \"@m(c)@