'\" t
'\" <<bold-is-fixed>>
'\" <<ital-is-var>>
.TH GMA-MAPPER 3 "GMA-Mapper 4.35" 27-Nov-2025 "API Functions" \" @@mp@@
.SH NAME
gma-mapper \- Various functions of interest
.SH SYNOPSIS
'\" <<usage>>
.na
.B source
.B gmazones.tcl
.LP
.B ComputedReachMatrix
.I size_code
.I natural
.I extended
\[->]
.I template
.br
.B CreatureDisplayedSize
.I id
\[->]
.I size_code
.br
.B creature_display_zoom
.I size_code
.I dispsize
.I zoom
\[->]
.I effective_zoom
.br
.B CreatureSizeParams
.I size_code
\[->]
.BI { category
.I natural
.I extended
.IB space }
.br
.B FullCreatureAreaInfo
.I id
\[->]
.BI { space
.I natural
.I extended
.I matrix
.IB custom }
.br
.B MatchesStandardTemplate
.I size_code
.I natural
.I extended
\[->]
.I template
.br
.B MonsterSizeValue
.I size_code
\[->]
.I grids
.br
.B ReachMatrix
.I size_code
\[->]
.I template
.ad
'\" <</usage>>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
This document describes the usage of a number of functions internal to the mapper client,
either in the
.B mapper.tcl
or
.B gmazones.tcl
source file, but are not in their own package.
.LP
Over time, more functions may be added here as it seems useful to have them documented
for reference.
'\" <<list>>
.TP 10
.BI "ComputedReachMatrix " size_code " " natural " " extended
If the specified values match an existing template, that is returned without going to any more trouble.
Otherwise, a template is calculated and returned based on the requested values.
The
.I natural
and 
.I extended
values are in grid square units.
.TP
.BI "CreatureDisplayedSize " id
Given a creature's
.I id
number, this returns the
.I size_code
that should be used for displaying it. This is based on the creature's
.B Size
and
.B DispSize
attributes.
.TP
.BI "creature_display_zoom " size_code " " dispsize " " zoom
Given a creature's
.IR size_code ,
the size code
.I dispsize
that you want to display them as (temporarily), and the map's
current
.I zoom
factor, this returns the zoom factor for the creature token image
to use to accomplish this, assuming that creature images are available
at zoom factors 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 32.
It will choose the image zoom factor from that list that is not larger
than the creature's token size. This means a smaller image may be
used.
.TP
.BI "CreatureSizeParams " size_code
Given a creature size code in the form
.IR category [ nat ][\fB->\fP ext ][\fB=\fP space ], 
this function parses out the various parameters that may appear in that code.
Note that the values for
.IR nat ,
.IR ext ,
and 
.I space
are in units of feet.
If the
.I size_code
is invalid, the empty string will be returned.
Otherwise the return value is a four-element list consisting of the following elements.
Any which were not specified in the
.I size_code
are empty strings in the returned list.
.RS
'\"<<desc>>
.TP 10
.I category
The size category as a single letter.
.TP
.I nat
The natural reach diameter in grid squares.
.TP
.I ext
The extended reach diameter in grid squares.
.TP
.I space
The creature's occupied space diameter in grid squares.
.RE
'\" <</>>
.TP 
.BI "FullCreatureAreaInfo " id
This is the main function that will usually be called when managing on-screen creatures.
It accepts a creature
.I id
which is used to look up the creature's
.BR CustomReach ,
.BR DispSize ,
and
.RB Size .
It then returns the creature's actual distance values as a list with the following elements, or it returns
the empty string if it was unable to understand the creature's size.
.RS
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 10
.I space
The creature's occupied space in grid-square units.
.TP
.I natural
The creature's natural reach distance in grid-square units.
.TP
.I extended
The creature's extended reach distance in grid-square units.
.TP
.I matrix
The creature's threat zone matrix as described for
.BR ReachMatrix .
.TP
.I custom
A dictionary containing the creature's
.B CustomReach
attribute if there is one; otherwise it is the empty string.
.RE
'\" <</>>
.TP
.BI "MatchesStandardTemplate " size_code " " natural " " extended
Given a
.I size_code
as described above, and the desired
.I natural
and 
.I reach
distances in grid squares, this function returns a
.I template
list, as defined in the description of the
.B ReachMatrix
function, if the values 
happen to exactly match one of the standard creature space and reach templates.
Otherwise, it returns the empty string.
.TP
.BI "MonsterSizeValue " size_code
Returns the space occupied by the creature in units of grid squares, which may be a real number.
If the
.I size_code
cannot be understood, 0 is returned.
.TP
.BI "ReachMatrix " size_code
Given a
.IR size_code ,
this returns a creature area template based on the first character of
.IR size_code .
If that character does not correspond to a standard size category, the empty string
is returned. Otherwise, the template is a 3-element list with the following values:
.RS
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 10
.I natural
The distance in grid squares of the creature's natural reach zone.
.TP
.I extended
The distance in grid squares of the creature's extended reach zone.
.TP
.I matrix
a 2D list in row-major order. Each element describes a grid square on the map,
with the creature in the center of that matrix. If an element has the value 0,
that square is not part of the creature's threat zones. If it is 1, then it is
part of the extended area; if 2, it is part of the natural area; if 3, it is
part of both.
.RE
'\" <</>>
'\" <</>>
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Steve Willoughby / steve@madscience.zone.
.SH COPYRGHT
Part of the GMA software suite, copyright \(co 1992\-2025 by Steven L. Willoughby, Aloha, Oregon, USA. All Rights Reserved. Distributed under BSD-3-Clause License. \"@m(c)@