.\" vim:set syntax=nroff:
'\" <<bold-is-fixed>>
'\" <<ital-is-var>>
.TH GMA-USTAR 3 "GMA-Mapper 4.36.5" 14-Jan-2026 "API Functions" \" @@mp@@
.SH NAME
ustar \- Pure Tcl USTAR Archive Reader
.SH SYNOPSIS
'\" <<usage>>
.na
(If package installed globally)
.br
.B package
.B require
.B ustar
.LP
(Otherwise)
.br
.B source
.B ustar.tcl
.LP
.B ::ustar::contents
.I stream
.LP
.B ::ustar::file_contents
.I path
.LP
.B ::ustar::gzip_contents
.I path
.LP
.B ::ustar::extract
.I stream
.I callback
.LP
.B ::ustar::file_extract
.I path
.I callback
.LP
.B ::ustar::gzip_extract
.I path
.I callback
.LP
.B ::ustar::format_contents
.I contents
.ad
'\" <</usage>>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
This module provides a simple interface for reading USTAR archive files, to either
enumerate their contents or extract them completely.
The following procedures are provided.
'\" <<list>>
.TP 10
.BI "::ustar::contents " stream
Scan the archive by reading data from
.I stream
(which must be a stream channel open in binary mode).
The stream is not closed at the end of the operation.
This returns a list of metadata values, one per file, in the order
in which they appear in the archive. Each is a list of 13 values:
.RS
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 12
.I size
The length, in bytes, of the file. Things without lengths (such as directories) will
have a zero in this field.
.TP
.I type
The file type. This is a single character exactly as found in the USTAR header field.
A null byte or ASCII
.B 0
digit indicates a regular file. Other than null, the type characters will be ASCII alphanumeric
characters. A 
.B 1
indicates the file is a hard link to another file already recorded in the archive. A
.B 2
indicates that this entry describes a symbolic link. Types
.BR 3 ,
.BR 4 ,
.BR 5 ,
and
.B 6 
indicate character devices, block devices, directories, and FIFOs respectively.
Other type values may be used to designate vendor-specific custom types of files.
.TP
.I name
The full pathname of the file. This might contain arbitrary Unicode characters.
.TP
.I mode
The binary file mode as described in
.BR lstat (2).
.TP
.I uid
The numeric user ID of the file's owner.
.TP
.I uname
If provided in the archive, the user name of the file's owner.
.TP
.I gid
The numeric group ID of the file's owner.
.TP
.I gname
If provided in the archive, the group name of the file's owner.
.TP
.I mtime
The file's modification time as a UNIX 
.B time_t
value. If the archive supports it, this may be a floating-point value
giving fractional seconds.
.TP
.I link
For links, this is the pathname of the file being linked to.
.TP
.I major
For devices, this is the numeric major device number. Otherwise zero.
.TP
.I minor
For devices, this is the numeric minor device number. Otherwise zero.
.TP
.I attrs
If any extended attributes were given for the file, they are listed here. This is
a list with an even number of elements, which are taken in pairs as the name of the
attribute followed by its value. These are completely arbitrary. Any which map directly
to the above metadata fields are automatically updated in the other fields, but regardless
of that, the entire extended attribute set appears here.
'\" <</>>
.RE
.TP
.BI "::ustar::file_contents " path
As an convenience function, this opens
.I path
as a binary file and then calls
.B contents
on it, returning the result.
This does close the file when finished reading from it.
.TP
.BI "::ustar::gzip_contents " path
As with
.B file_contents 
but decompresses the data as described for
.B gzip_extract
below.
.TP
.BI "::ustar::extract " stream " " callback
This reads the archive data from the open binary file stream channel
.I stream
like the
.B contents
procedure does, but it also extracts the actual file data in addition to
the metadata for each file. As each file is read, the supplied
.I callback
procedure is invoked to handle the disposition of the file's data, so the
caller can decide whether to process the data in-memory or save it somewhere,
perhaps after other processing takes place.
The callback is invoked with two arguments: the metadata as already described
above for the
.B contents
procedure, and the binary data of the file itself.
.TP
.BI "::ustar::file_extract " path " " callback
As an convenience function, this opens
.I path
as a binary file and then calls
.B extract
on it, saving the caller from the trouble of opening and closing
the archive.
.TP
.BI "::ustar::gzip_extract " path " " callback
As with
.B file_extract
but also decompresses the contents of
.I path
while reading from it. This uses a 
.BR gzip (1)-compatible
decompresion suitable for tar archives created with
.BR tar "'s"
.B \-z
option.
.TP
.BI "::ustar::format_contents " contents
Given a list of metadata values exactly as returned by the
.B contents
procedure, this returns a multi-line string with that information
formatted in a human-readable presentation. Not all extended attributes
are included.
'\" <</>>
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.LP
An exception is thrown if the archive is unable to be processed for reasons such as unexpected end of file, 
unparseable header fields, checksum verification failures, etc.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gzip (1),
.BR lstat (2),
.BR pax (1),
.BR tar (1).
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Steve Willoughby / steve@madscience.zone.
.SH HISTORY
.LP
Initial version created 16 July 2020.
.SH BUGS
.LP
Does not support base-256-encoded numeric values in headers, nor global extended header blocks.
Neither of those is commonly found enough to prioritize implementation but that may change in the
future.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Part of the GMA software suite, copyright \(co 1992\-2026 by Steven L. Willoughby, Aloha, Oregon, USA. All Rights Reserved. Distributed under BSD-3-Clause License. \"@m(c)@